

## Detecting patterns in raster plots

### Paper by [@Grossberger2018]

* Temporally ordered multi-neuron patterns likely encode information in the brain. We introduce an unsupervised method, SPOTDisClust (Spike Pattern Optimal Transport Dissimilarity Clustering), for their detection from high-dimensional neural ensembles. SPOTDisClust measures similarity between two ensemble spike patterns by determining the minimum transport cost of transforming their corresponding normalized cross-correlation matrices into each other (SPOTDis).
* Detecting these temporal patterns represents a major methodological challenge.
* Many approaches to this problem are supervised, that is, they take patterns occurring concurrently with a known event, such as the delivery of a stimulus for sensory neurons or the traversal of a running track for hippocampal place fields, as a “template” and then search for repetitions of the same template in spiking activity :
 * Nadasdy Z, Hirase H, Czurko A, Csicsvari J, Buzsaki G. Replay and time compression of recurring spike sequences in the hippocampus. J Neurosci. 1999;19(21):9497–507. pmid:10531452
 * Lee AK, Wilson MA. A combinatorial method for analyzing sequential firing patterns involving an arbitrary number of neurons based on relative time order. J Neurophysiol. 2004;92(4):2555–73. pmid:15212425
 * Davidson TJ, Kloosterman F, Wilson MA. Hippocampal replay of extended experience. Neuron. 2009;63(4):497–507. pmid:19709631
* only one spike per neuron: fig 1A = "For each pattern and each neuron, a random position was chosen for the activation pulse."
 * t-SNE projection with HDBSCAN labels shows that our clustering method can retrieve all patterns from the data.
* data available @ https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006283.s013


![Fig 1 of @Grossberger2018: "Simulated example illustrating the steps in SPOTDisClust. A) Structure of five “ground-truth” patterns, affecting 50 neurons. λin = 0.2 spks/sample, λout = 0.02 spks/sample. Tepoch = 300 samples, Tpulse = 30 samples. For each pattern and each neuron, a random position was chosen for the activation pulse. B) Neuronal output is generated according to an inhomogeneous Poisson process, with rates dictated by the patterns in (A). A total of 300 epochs were simulated, out of which 150 epochs were noise patterns, and each of the 5 patterns contributed 30 epochs. "](https://storage.googleapis.com/plos-corpus-prod/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006283/2/pcbi.1006283.g001.PNG_L?X-Goog-Algorithm=GOOG4-RSA-SHA256&X-Goog-Credential=wombat-sa%40plos-prod.iam.gserviceaccount.com%2F20211206%2Fauto%2Fstorage%2Fgoog4_request&X-Goog-Date=20211206T141911Z&X-Goog-Expires=86400&X-Goog-SignedHeaders=host&X-Goog-Signature=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){#fig:G2018-1 width="5in"}


### [@Russo2017]

* "Here we present such a unifying methodological and conceptual framework which detects assembly structure at many different time scales, levels of precision, and with arbitrary internal organization. " by @Russo2017
* sliding window as in [@Grün2002] ("Numerous other statistical procedures for detecting assemblies or sequential patterns have been proposed previously") - extended to multiple lags [@Torre2016]
* based on a "non-stationarity-corrected parametric test statistic for assessing the independence of pairs" and "an agglomerative, heuristic clustering algorithm for fusing significant pairs into higher-order assemblies"

### Rastermap

* https://www.janelia.org/lab/stringer-lab [@rastermap]
* https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/374090v2 [@Stringer2019nature, @Stringer2019science]




#### Paper by [@Moser2014]

On Stability of Distance Measures for Event Sequences Induced by Level-Crossing Sampling
