

## State-of-the-art


### spike pattern clustering

#### Paper by [@Grossberger2018]
* Temporally ordered multi-neuron patterns likely encode information in the brain. We introduce an unsupervised method, SPOTDisClust (Spike Pattern Optimal Transport Dissimilarity Clustering), for their detection from high-dimensional neural ensembles. SPOTDisClust measures similarity between two ensemble spike patterns by determining the minimum transport cost of transforming their corresponding normalized cross-correlation matrices into each other (SPOTDis).
* Detecting these temporal patterns represents a major methodological challenge.
* Many approaches to this problem are supervised, that is, they take patterns occurring concurrently with a known event, such as the delivery of a stimulus for sensory neurons or the traversal of a running track for hippocampal place fields, as a “template” and then search for repetitions of the same template in spiking activity :
 * Nadasdy Z, Hirase H, Czurko A, Csicsvari J, Buzsaki G. Replay and time compression of recurring spike sequences in the hippocampus. J Neurosci. 1999;19(21):9497–507. pmid:10531452
 * Lee AK, Wilson MA. A combinatorial method for analyzing sequential firing patterns involving an arbitrary number of neurons based on relative time order. J Neurophysiol. 2004;92(4):2555–73. pmid:15212425
 * Davidson TJ, Kloosterman F, Wilson MA. Hippocampal replay of extended experience. Neuron. 2009;63(4):497–507. pmid:19709631
* only one spike per neuron: fig 1A = "For each pattern and each neuron, a random position was chosen for the activation pulse."
 * t-SNE projection with HDBSCAN labels shows that our clustering method can retrieve all patterns from the data.
* data available @ https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006283.s013


#### Rastermap

* https://www.janelia.org/lab/stringer-lab
* https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/374090v2 [@Stringer2019nature, @Stringer2019science]




#### Paper by [@Moser2014]

On Stability of Distance Measures for Event Sequences Induced by Level-Crossing Sampling
